---
layout: paper
title: Nested Partially-Latent Class Models for Dependent Binary Data; Estimating Disease Etiology
image: /assets/images/papers/nplcm.png
authors: Zhenke Wu, Maria Deloria-Knoll, Scott Zeger
year: 2016
shortref: Wu et al. (2016). Biostatistics.
journal: "Biostatistics."
pdf: /assets/pdfs/papers/wu-2016-nplcm.pdf
slides: /assets/pdfs/slides/nplcm-short.pdf
supplement: /assets/pdfs/papers/wu-2016-nplcm-supp.pdf
github: https://github.com/zhenkewu/baker
doi: doi:10.1093/biostatistics/kxw037
type: statistical
---

# Abstract

The Pneumonia Etiology Research for Child Health (PERCH) study seeks to use modern measurement
technology to infer the causes of pneumonia for which gold-standard evidence is unavailable. Based on
case-control data, the article describes a latent variable model designed to infer the etiology distribution for
the population of cases, and for an individual case given her measurements.We assume each observation
is drawn from a mixture model for which each component represents one disease class. The model
conisidered here addresses a major limitation of the traditional latent class approach by taking account of
residual dependence among multivariate binary outcomes given disease class, hence reducing estimation
bias, retaining efficiency and offering more valid inference. Such “local dependence” on each subject
is induced in the model by nesting latent subclasses within each disease class. Measurement precision
and covariation can be estimated using the control sample for whom the class is known. In a Bayesian
framework, we use stick-breaking priors on the subclass indicators for model-averaged inference across
different numbers of subclasses. Assessment of model fit and individual diagnosis are done using posterior
samples drawn by Gibbs sampling. We demonstrate the utility of the method on simulated and on the
motivating PERCH data.

**Keywords** Bayesian methods; Case-control studies; Local dependence; Latent class model; Measurement
error; Disease etiology.


# Bibtex


```
@Article{wu2017nested,
  author          = {Wu, Zhenke and Deloria-Knoll, Maria and Zeger, Scott L},
  title           = {Nested partially latent class models for dependent binary data; estimating disease etiology.},
  journal         = {Biostatistics (Oxford, England)},
  year            = {2017},
  volume          = {18},
  pages           = {200--213},
  month           = apr,
  issn            = {1468-4357},
  citation-subset = {IM},
  completed       = {2017-07-24},
  country         = {England},
  doi             = {10.1093/biostatistics/kxw037},
  issn-linking    = {1465-4644},
  issue           = {2},
  pii             = {kxw037},
  pmid            = {27549120},
}
```