---
layout: paper
title: Probabilistic Cause-of-disease Assignment using Case-control Diagnostic Tests - A Hierarchcial Bayesian Latent Variable Regression Approach
image: /assets/images/papers/toblerone.png
authors: Zhenke Wu, Irena Chen
year: 2019+
shortref: Wu and Chen (2019+). Submitted
journal: Submitted
pdf: /assets/pdfs/papers/nplcm_reg_main_paper.pdf
slides: /assets/pdfs/slides/nplcm_reg.pdf
supplement: /assets/pdfs/papers/nplcm_reg_supplement.pdf  
poster: /assets/pdfs/posters/MIDAS_2019_poster.pdf
github: https://github.com/zhenkewu/baker
doi: 
external_link: https://arxiv.org/abs/1906.08436
video_link: 
type: statistical
---

# Abstract

Optimal prevention and treatment strategies for a disease of multiple causes must be informed by the population distribution of causes among cases, or cause-specific case fraction (CSCFs) which may further depend on explanatory variables. However, the true causes are often not observed, motivating the use of non-gold-standard diagnostic tests that provide indirect etiologic evidence. Based on case-control multivariate binary data, this paper proposes a novel and unified modeling framework for estimating CSCF functions, closing the existing methodological gap in disease etiology research. With a novel shrinkage prior to encourage parsimonious approximation to a multivariate binary distribution given covariates, the model leverages critical control data for valid probabilistic cause assignment for cases. We derive an efficient Markov chain Monte Carlo algorithm for flexible posterior inference. We illustrate the inference of CSCF functions using extensive simulations and show that the proposed model produces less biased estimates and more valid inference of the overall CSCFs than an analysis that omits covariates. A regression analysis of pediatric pneumonia data reveals the dependence of CSCFs upon season, age, HIV status and disease severity.

**Keywords** Bayesian methods; Case-control studies; Disease etiology; Latent class regression analysis; Measurement errors; Pneumonia; Semi-supervised learning.


```
@article{wu2019regression,
  title={Regression Analysis of Dependent Binary Data for Estimating Disease Etiology from Case-Control Studies},
  author={Wu, Zhenke and Chen, Irena},
  journal={arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.08436},
  year={2019}
}
```