---
layout: paper
title: "Integrating Sample Similarities into Latent Class Analysis: A Tree-Structured Shrinkage Approach"
image: /assets/images/papers/tree_lcm.png
authors: Mengbing Li, Daniel Park, Maliha Aziz, Cindy M Liu, Lance Price, Zhenke Wu
year: 2021
shortref: Li et al. (2021). Biometrics. In press.
journal: Biometrics. In press.
pdf: /assets/pdfs/papers/tree_lcm.pdf
slides: 
supplement: /assets/pdfs/papers/supplement_tree_lcm.pdf  
poster: 
github: https://github.com/zhenkewu/lotR
doi: 
external_link: https://shorturl.at/npsO7
video_link: 
type: statistical
---

# Abstract

This paper is concerned with using multivariate binary observations to estimate the proportions of unobserved classes with scientiﬁc meanings. We focus on the setting where additional information about sample similarities is available and represented by a rooted weighted tree. Every leaf in the given tree contains multiple independent samples. Shorter distances over the tree between the leaves indicate higher similarity. We propose a novel data integrative extension to classical latent class models (LCMs) with tree-structured shrinkage. The proposed approach enables 1) borrowing of information across leaves, 2) estimating data-driven leaf groups with distinct vectors of class proportions, and 3) individual-level probabilistic class assignment given the observed multivariate binary measurements. We derive and implement a scalable posterior inference algorithm in a variational Bayes framework. Extensive simulations show more accurate estimation of class proportions than alternatives that suboptimally use the additional sample similarity information. A zoonotic infectious disease application is used to illustrate the proposed approach. The paper concludes by a brief discussion on model limitations and extensions.

**Keywords** Gaussian Diffusion; Latent Class Models; Phylogenetic Tree; Zoonotic Infectious Diseases; Spike-and-Slab Prior; Variational Bayes.