---
layout: paper
title: "Etiology of acute lower respiratory illness hospitalizations among infants in four countries"
image: /assets/images/papers/IRIS.png
authors: John Kubale*, Stephanie Kujawski*, Irena Chen, Zhenke Wu, Ilham Abu Khader, Iris Hasibra, Brett Whitaker, Lionel Gresh, Artan Simaku, Eric A.F. Simões, Mahmoud Al-Gazo, Shannon Rogers, Susan I. Gerber, Angel Balmaseda, Veronica L. Tallo, Tareq M. Al-Sanouri, Rachael Porter, Silvia Bino, Eduardo Azziz-Baumgartner, Meredith McMorrow, Danielle Hunt, Mark Thompson, Holly M. Biggs, Aubree Gordon
year: 2023
shortref: Kubale et al (2023). Open Forum Infectious Diseases.
journal: "Open Forum Infectious Diseases."
pdf: 
slides: 
supplement:
github: 
doi: 10.1093/ofid/ofad580
external_link: 
type: substantive
 
---

`*`: equal contribution

# Abstract

## Background

Recent studies explored which pathogens drive the global burden of pneumonia hospitalizations among young children. However, the etiology of broader acute lower respiratory tract infections (ALRI) remains unclear.

## Methods

Using a multi-country study (Albania, Jordan, Nicaragua, and the Philippines) of hospitalized infants and non-ill community controls between 2015-2017, we assessed the prevalence and severity of viral infections and co-infections. We also estimated the proportion of ALRI-hospitalizations caused by 21 respiratory pathogens identified via multiplex real-time RT-PCR using Bayesian Nested Partially Latent Class Models.

## Results

3,632 hospitalized infants and 1,068 non-ill community controls participated in the study and had specimens tested. Among hospitalized infants, 1,743 (48.0%) met the ALRI case-definition for the etiology analysis. After accounting for prevalence in non-ill controls, respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) was responsible for the largest proportion of ALRI hospitalizations though the magnitude varied across sites—ranging from 65.2% (95% Credible Interval [CrI]: 46.3,79.6) in Albania to 34.9% (95% CrI: 20.0, 49.0) in the Philippines. While the fraction of ALRI hospitalizations caused by RSV decreased as age increased, it remained the greatest driver. After RSV, Rhinovirus/Enterovirus (RV/EV) (range: 13.4%-27.1%), and human Metapneumovirus (HMPV) (range: 6.3%-12.0%) were the next highest contributors to ALRI hospitalizations. 

## Conclusions

We observed substantial numbers of ALRI hospitalizations with RSV the largest source, particularly in infants aged <3 months. This underscores the potential for vaccines and long-lasting monoclonal antibodies on the horizon to reduce the burden of ALRI in infants worldwide.


