---
layout: member
title: Zhenke Wu
position: Principal Investigator
institute: University of Michigan
handle: Zhenke Wu
email: zhenkewu@gmail[punto]com
twitter: ZhenkeWu
github: zhenkewu
scholar: 3ffCNrEAAAAJ
image: /assets/images/team/zhenke-wu.jpg
cv: https://www.overleaf.com/read/dbktqfjxccbv
alum: false
collaborator: false
support: false
showicon: true     
web: zhenkewu.com
field: stat
authors: " "
---

Bio:
======

Zhenke Wu’s research involves the development of statistical methods that inform health decisions made by individuals. He is particularly interested in scalable Bayesian methods that integrate multiple sources of evidence, with a focus on hierarchical latent variable modeling. He also works on sequential decision making by developing new statistical tools for reinforcement learning and micro-randomized trials. He has developed methods to estimate the etiology of childhood pneumonia, cause-of-death distributions using verbal autopsy, autoantibody signatures for subsetting autoimmune disease patients, and to estimate time-varying causal effects of mobile prompts upon lagged physical, mental and behavioral health outcomes.

Zhenke has developed original methods and software that are now used by investigators from research institutes such as US CDC and Johns Hopkins, as well as site investigators from developing countries, e.g., Kenya, South Africa, Gambia, Mali, Zambia, Thailand and Bangladesh.

Zhenke completed a BS in Math at Fudan University and a PhD in Biostatistics from the Johns Hopkins University and then stayed at Hopkins for his postdoctoral training. Zhenke is currently an Associate Professor of Biostatistics at University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Associate Professor of Global Public Health, and a faculty affiliate in Michigan Institute for Data Science (MIDAS). Zhenke serves as an Associate Editor for *Annals of Applied Statistics*, *Biostatistics*, *Journal of Royal Statistical Society: Series A (JRSS-A)* and a *Statistical Consultant and Reviewer* for New England Journal of Medicine - Artificial Intelligence (NEJM-AI).

When not thinking about Statistics/AI, you can often find me playing basketball, running, rock climbing, hiking, downhill skiing, or doing short/mid-distance triathlon (Ironman 70.3: 2025 Michigan).



Contact:
======

{{site.department.name}}<br>
{{site.institution.name}}<br>
{{site.department.address}}<br>
{{site.department.office}}<br>
{{site.department.city}}<br>
**Email**: {{site.author.email}}<br>

__Office Phone:__ __{{site.department.workphone}}__ <br>

Direction to my office: [[.pdf]](/assets/pdfs/team/zhenkewu-office.pdf)

